Now we come to the principal talk
of the graduation.
It’s going to be delivered by a member
of the Governing Body,
Brother Stephen Lett.
And the very interesting theme
he has selected is
“We Can Learn Much From Peter!”
Dear Gilead students,
let me ask you,
Who is your favorite Bible character?
Well, during Gilead,
you’ve examined many Bible characters;
you’ve learned
positive and negative lessons from them.
And perhaps your favorite character changed,
remained the same,
or now you have
several favorite Bible characters.
But no matter who your favorite character is,
during this talk, we’re going to learn
some of the many lessons to be learned
from the very interesting Bible character Peter.
Now first, let’s learn some things
we can learn
about Jehovah and Jesus from Peter.
One thing we definitely learn
is that Jehovah and Jesus allow for
—in fact, apparently relish—
different personalities among their servants.
Now, to illustrate this,
let’s contrast the personality of Peter
with that of some of the other apostles.
Open up to John chapter 20,
and here’s a very interesting little scripture
highlighting two different personalities.
John 20:3:
“Then Peter and the other disciple
[who would be John]
“set out for the tomb.
“The two of them began running together,
“but the other disciple ran faster than Peter
and reached the tomb first.
“Stooping forward,
he saw the linen cloths lying there,
“but he did not go in.
“Then Simon Peter also came, following him,
“and he went into the tomb.
And he saw the linen cloths lying there.”
So John looked inside; Peter rushed inside.
Now, here’s another example:
When the mob came
to arrest Jesus in Gethsemane,
John 18:10
says that Peter drew his sword
and cut the right ear
of the slave of the high priest off.
Now, let’s think about this.
Do you think that Peter
was going for that right ear?
I mean, that would truly be impressive
—wouldn’t it?—
to go for that right ear and precisely take it off.
But remember, Peter was not a swordsman;
he was a fisherman.
Obviously, he was going
for the man’s head, wasn’t he?
But he missed and took the ear off.
But what an impetuous,
you could say, personality he had there!
Here’s one more example:
The resurrected Jesus
is on the shore of the Sea of Galilee;
and the disciples are in the boat;
and John says to Peter, “It is the Lord.”
Well, upon hearing this,
Peter put his garment on
and plunged into the sea.
The other disciples came in the boat.
So notice,
John spoke; Peter plunged.
The other disciples came in the boat;
Peter came swimming.
Very different personalities
—but, as we said,
Jehovah and Jesus relish
these different personalities
among their servants.
But now, what’s the lesson for us?
Well, in imitation of Jehovah and Jesus,
we’re obligated
to “have love
for the whole association of [our] brothers.”
—1 Peter 2:17.
And “whole” means 100 percent.
And that certainly includes those
with very different personalities from ourselves
—ones from different cultures and backgrounds.
We’re obligated to receive these ones
into our company,
into our homes, into our hearts.
Now, you’ve done a lot of this
in the last five months,
you Gilead students.
Well, you want to keep doing this
and, of course, all of us want to do this.
But now, here’s another thing we learn
about Jehovah and Jesus from Peter.
Jehovah and Jesus are very forgiving.
Now, let’s think about Jesus’ words
at Matthew 10:33.
In plain words
—and our publications have said
probably plain Hebrew words,
it would have been—
Jesus said:
“Whoever disowns me before men,
“I will also disown him
before my Father who is in the heavens.”
Not once, not twice,
but three times Peter did it, didn’t he?
But yet Jehovah and Jesus
completely forgave him
because he was truly repentant.
In fact, to somewhat counterbalance
what Peter had done,
Jesus allowed Peter
to reaffirm his love for Jesus three times.
Well, what’s the lesson for us?
We must imitate Jehovah and Jesus
in being very forgiving.
In fact, Jehovah makes it clear
that He will forgive us
in direct proportion to how we forgive others.
If we don’t forgive others,
Jehovah won’t forgive us.
Where does that leave us?
Doomed.
But let’s say we do forgive,
but we’re pretty tight;
we’re pretty stingy.
It’s kind of hard to squeeze
a little forgiveness out of us.
Well, the indication is that Jehovah puts
that same ruler on us that we put on others.
On the other hand,
if we’re very generous in forgiving,
now Jehovah can be
very generous in forgiving us.
So if someone hurt you deeply
—has sinned against you—
don’t view this as a bad thing;
view this as a big opportunity.
You’ve got a big opportunity
to get a lot of forgiveness from Jehovah,
so cash in on that opportunity.
But now, in addition to what we can learn
about Jehovah and Jesus from Peter,
there are many lessons (positive and negative)
that we can learn from Peter himself.
So let’s do that.
Now, here’s a negative lesson:
At times, Peter spoke too quickly.
He had what has been called
hoof-and-mouth disease.
What is that?
Open mouth; insert foot.
And some of us
have the same problem, don’t we?
But here’s an example in Matthew chapter 16.
Jesus was explaining
that he would have to go to Jerusalem,
suffer many things, and be killed.
Well, quickly Peter spoke up,
and he actually rebuked Jesus
—if you can imagine that.
“Be kind to yourself, Lord;
you will not have this happen to you at all.”
It was hoof-and-mouth disease
—wasn’t it?—
followed by, as you could expect,
some correction, humiliation:
“Get behind me, Satan!”
But the indication is
that even though Peter
had this problem, he overcame it.
He overcame this.
Several times he spoke too quickly.
But at 1 Peter 3:10,
he was able to write
with freeness of speech,
we know,
and he would have lived up to this:
“Whoever would love life and see good days
must guard his tongue.”
So he learned.
It took time.
He learned just like we’re all learning.
But now, what’s the lesson for us?
Well, it’s summed up nicely here
in Proverbs chapter 18.
Please go there.
Proverbs 18:13:
“When anyone replies
to a matter before he hears the facts,
it is foolish and humiliating.”
So none of us can perfectly bridle our tongues.
But we do well to try to restrain our lips,
at least until we’ve heard the facts.
Now, here’s another negative lesson:
At times, Peter was overconfident.
The most notorious example
—Matthew chapter 26:
“Although all the others
are stumbled in connection with you,
“I will never be stumbled!
“Even if I should have to die with you,
I will by no means disown you.”
Well, that was overconfidence, wasn’t it?
And we know it was ‘pride before the crash.’
Well, what was his problem?
He was relying,
at this point, on himself
rather than Jehovah.
But again, the indication is very strong
that he overcame that weakness.
And later, he was able to write at 1 Peter 5:6:
“Humble yourselves, therefore,
under the mighty hand of God.”
So don’t rely on yourself.
Be humble under Jehovah’s hand.
Now, what’s the lesson for us?
Well, like we learned at our convention
—the last talk on Saturday—
that true courage is not self-reliance.
True courage must be based
on modest reliance on Jehovah.
When we lean on ourselves,
or rely on ourselves,
it’s like leaning,
you could say, on a rubber crutch.
Did you ever lean on a rubber crutch?
You’re going to fall, aren’t you?
But at Deuteronomy 32:4,
Jehovah is “the Rock.”
If you lean on a rock,
now you have something.
So we learn that from Peter:
Don’t rely on yourself;
rely always on Jehovah.
Now, here’s one more negative lesson:
At times, Peter was ensnared
by fear of man
or, we could say,
in his most infamous example,
fear of girl.
Interestingly, in Matthew 26:
‘Peter was sitting outside
and a servant girl came up and said to him:
‘“You too were with Jesus the Galilean!”
‘But he denied it.
‘“I do not know what you’re talking about.”
‘He went out to the gatehouse;
another girl noticed him.
‘“This man was with Jesus.”
Again he denied it, even with an oath.’
So his first two denials,
you could say, were fear of girl.
But it is obviously clear
that he truly overcame
that weakness, that problem,
and he became
an outspoken, bold Witness
of Jehovah and Jesus.
Think, for example, in Acts chapter 5,
where Peter and the other apostles
were in front of the Sanhedrin,
and the high priest said:
‘We ordered you
to quit teaching about this Jesus.’
Peter said:
“We must obey God as ruler rather than men.”
‘And furthermore, this Jesus,
God has raised him from the dead.
This one that you killed.’
Wow!
No fear of man there, was there?
He obviously overcame this problem.
Now, what’s the lesson for us?
We want to do our utmost to never be ensnared
by fear of men, women, or girls.
And, of course, always remembering
that it’s Jehovah’s rating of us
that counts will help us.
Humans can’t add five seconds
to their life, can they?
Jehovah can add or subtract eternity.
But now, we’re going to move
to some positive lessons
we can learn from Peter.
And by far, his positive qualities
outweigh the negative qualities
that he displayed at times.
Now here’s one:
Peter waited on Jehovah.
And a wonderful example
of this is in John chapter 6.
Jesus had stated
that unless you eat my flesh
and drink my blood,
you will not have everlasting life.
And the Bible says
that many of the disciples were shocked;
they were stumbled;
they quit following Jesus.
And Jesus said to Peter,
‘Do you want to leave also, Peter?’
Do you remember those beautiful words
coming out of Peter’s mouth?
“Lord, whom shall we go away to?
You have [the] sayings of everlasting life.”
Now, if you think about it,
Peter didn’t understand Jesus’ words
at this point any more than the rest did,
but he was willing to wait
on Jehovah for further enlightenment.
And in time, he learned that those words
have to be understood figuratively
—that we have to exercise faith
in Jesus’ flesh and blood.
Well, what’s the lesson for us?
Like Peter, we must show
a waiting attitude
for the “God of [our] salvation.”
—Micah 7:7.
Now, here are just a few examples:
Are we willing to wait
—and this was touched on earlier in our program—
willing to wait with the right attitude
for any theocratic appointment,
or privilege of service?
Here’s another example:
Are we willing to wait uncomplainingly
on Jehovah to correct
—in his way, his time—
any injustice that we perceive
in the congregation?
Or what about this?
Are we willing to wait patiently
—and this could apply
to some of the single ones—
Are you willing to wait patiently on Jehovah
to provide you a suitable marriage mate,
even if you have to wait until the new world?
Yes, like Peter, let’s have a waiting attitude.
But now,
here’s another positive lesson from Peter:
In order to make progress spiritually,
he was willing to move out of his comfort zones.
Now, let’s get some examples.
When invited, he promptly left
a life of pursuing material things
for a life of storing up treasure in heaven.
And apparently,
he was an older man when he did this.
But he did not put
financial security ahead of following the Christ.
Or here’s another example:
He went from being
an unlettered, ordinary fisherman,
probably talking primarily
to hired men and fish merchants,
to being a bold Witness
of an unpopular message before thousands.
One more example:
He went from being very prejudiced
against Samaritans and Gentiles
to truly loving
his Samaritan and Gentile brothers.
Well, what’s the lesson for us?
Are we willing to move out of our comfort zones
in order to make spiritual progress?
Now, all of you,
you know where your comfort zones are.
But are you willing to move out
in order to make spiritual progress?
What about, in some cases,
especially if you’re given an assignment,
are you willing to go
where the need is greater,
where Jehovah wants you to go?
Or what about reaching out
for various forms of the ministry
that you may not right now feel
so comfortable with
—maybe public witnessing
or working business territory?
What about being
more courageous in informal witnessing,
even though you may be
a quiet and shy type of person?
Well, let’s get
another positive lesson from Peter.
He allowed discipline
to mold rather than stumble him.
Of all the apostles,
he was the most outspoken, wasn’t he?
But that was matched
by his being the most frequently corrected,
reproved, rebuked.
But beautifully, he didn’t quit.
He never gave up, did he?
For example, we touched on this before,
when Jesus said, “Get behind me, Satan!”
We don’t read
that he pouted for weeks or months
because of that strong correction.
In fact, the Bible indicates that six days later,
Jesus took Peter, James, and John
up into a mountain
to experience the transfiguration.
Or what about after Peter denied Jesus?
The Bible tells us
that Jesus looked straight at Peter
—in effect, indirect discipline.
Peter recalled what Jesus said.
He went outside, and he wept bitterly.
But yet you don’t read
that he kept beating himself
—he kept being depressed
over his serious sin of denying Jesus.
He knew Jehovah and Jesus had forgiven him.
So he put it behind him
—didn’t he?—
and he moved ahead.
Well, the lesson for us?
Jehovah disciplines those he loves.
But don’t ever let
that discipline harden or embitter you.
Let it soften you into a better person.
If we’ve committed sins in the past,
even serious sins, like Peter,
let’s put them behind us and move ahead.
Well, one more positive lesson
we’re going to talk about from Peter:
He gained and then he maintained
true humility.
Now, it’s true that he
had to really work hard to gain it, didn’t he?
He had to work at it
because he and the other apostles
had been taught from infancy
to strive to be the greatest
—seek prominence.
It was really indoctrinated
into their minds and hearts.
And up until the very last night
of Jesus’ life on the earth,
Peter still had a problem
—didn’t he?—
and the other apostles too.
He had a problem.
Jesus was washing the feet.
John chapter 13
—Peter had not volunteered to do this
even after Jesus started washing the feet.
Have you ever thought about that?
Sometimes you don’t think of something
until someone else starts doing it,
and you think,
‘Oh, well, let me help you with that.’
Did Peter say: ‘Oh. Oh, Lord.
‘I see you’re washing these feet here.
Let me help you.
Let me catch a couple of feet for you.’
No.
Neither he nor any of the apostles volunteered.
They still had a problem at this point.
But with Jehovah’s help and effort on his part,
in time, he truly developed true humility.
He went from the one striving to be the greatest
to the humbled man who lifted up Cornelius
when Cornelius tried to bow down to him.
Remember that account in Acts chapter 10?
“Peter lifted him up, saying:
‘Rise; I too am just a man.’”
Or what about his genuine humility
when the apostle Paul corrected him publicly
in front of the whole congregation?
Now, if he would have still had pride—
‘Well, who are you, Paul, to give me correction?
‘I’ve been in the truth a lot longer than you have.
‘When you were persecuting the Christians,
‘I was an apostle.
‘And furthermore,
you could have at least talked to me privately,
not in front of the whole congregation.’
But no, he knew he was clearly wrong.
He deserved the counsel
no matter how it was given.
He made the correction,
and he harbored no grudge.
And the indication is very powerful
that he remained humble
despite his many privileges.
I mean, looking back over his life,
he had had many, many privileges.
Isn’t that true?
He walked on water, at least for a few minutes;
he saw Jesus transfigured;
he performed many miracles,
including personally resurrecting Dorcas;
he received and used “the keys of the Kingdom”;
he helped many people into the truth.
But yet he remained truly humble
and could write with freeness of speech
in his inspired letter,
at 1 Peter 5:5,
these beautiful words that we read very often.
He said:
“But all of you clothe yourselves
“with humility toward one another,
“because God opposes the haughty ones,
but he gives
undeserved kindness to the humble ones.”
And where is Peter right now?
An immortal spirit
serving as one of the “12 foundation stones”
of the Messianic Kingdom.
So, what is the lesson for us?
We must gain true humility like Peter did.
Otherwise, if you think about it,
we’re absolutely unusable by Jehovah.
And then, we must remain humble
no matter what privileges
we may or may not receive,
and then Jehovah will never oppose us.
Rather, we will continue to receive
undeserved kindness from him.
Well, our discussion has highlighted
just a few of the many lessons
to be learned from Peter.
I’m sure that if you Gilead students
—soon-to-be graduates—
make Peter a study project,
you could learn
many, many more valuable lessons
and, of course,
that’s true of many other Bible characters.
But unquestionably,
there is so much to learn
from the faithful, colorful, human apostle Peter.
So now we come
to the point where we’re going to make
the presentation of the diplomas,
and Brother Ronald Curzan
is with me here.
Let’s start, please, Brother Ron.
OK, so first of all we have Brother Abraha
will be returning to Ethiopia.
Brother and Sister Abras
will be returning to the Middle East.
Sister Bloedorn
will be returning to Timor-Leste.
Brother and Sister Bohnfeldt
will be returning to Greenland.
Brother Dugas
will be returning to Canada.
Brother Ekra
will be returning to Côte d’Ivoire.
Brother and Sister Ephraim
will be returning to Ethiopia.
Brother and Sister Farr
will be serving in Malta.
Brother and Sister Gorems
will be returning to Ethiopia.
Brother Kaljula
will be serving in Asia.
Brother Kiszkowski
will be serving in India.
Brother Koroinaqisia
will be returning to Fiji.
Brother and Sister Kristiadi
will be returning to Indonesia.
Brother and Sister Lett
will be serving in Trinidad and Tobago.
Sister Minginfel
will be returning to Yap.
Brother Myat
will be returning to Myanmar.
Brother and Sister Naidoo
will be returning to Angola.
Brother Nazombe
will be returning to Malawi.
Brother and Sister Nteziryayo
will be returning to Rwanda.
Brother Ovalle
will be returning to Chile.
Brother and Sister Pacanins
will be returning to Venezuela.
Brother and Sister Petrov
will be returning to Croatia.
Brother and Sister Razafintsalama
will be returning to Madagascar.
Brother and Sister Reungkittikul
will be returning to Thailand.
Brother and Sister Robert
will be serving in Turkey.
Brother and Sister Scholz
will be returning to Germany.
Sister Shebrah
will be returning to Ghana.
Brother Srzić
will be returning to Croatia.
Brother Stevens
will be returning to Asia.
Brother and Sister Valminos
will be serving in France.
And Brother Yambao
will be serving in India.
And lastly, Brother and Sister Yli-Huhtala
will be returning to Finland.
Well, thank you very much,
Brother Curzan.
You did very well with those names.
Although, you did have me worried.
I thought we were sending
Brother Lett somewhere else, but,
anyway, I got over the shock.
Well, we’d like to introduce to you now
the graduates
of the 145th class of Gilead.
So at this point,
we’re going to have a class letter
read to us by Brother Krish Naidoo.
Wow, it’s amazing how
your friends can take your breath away.
“September 8, 2018.
“To the Governing Body
and the Bethel Family.
“Dear Brothers: Five months ago,
“we arrived with excitement
from the four corners of the earth.
“We anxiously waited
to be molded into the people
“that our Father, Jehovah,
knew we could become.
“Despite denied visas,
health issues, and insecurities,
“we were prepared
to be taught by our Grand Instructor.
“Even after enrollment,
further challenges presented themselves.
“As a class, we fought measles,
“endured quarantine, survived tornadoes,
“nursed broken bones,
“and comforted each other
in the face of bereavement.
“However, these hurdles
did not hamper us;
“they drew us closer together as siblings
“and to our Father, Jehovah.
“Isaiah gave us a glimpse
into a heavenly school
“when he described the training Jesus
was then receiving from Jehovah
“to prepare him for his earthly assignment.
“Isaiah 50:4 describes
Jesus’ special education saying:
“‘He awakens me morning by morning;
“‘he awakens my ear
to listen like the taught ones.’
“Jesus knew very well
the purpose of his training:
“‘So that [he] may know how to answer
the tired one with the right word.’
“Out of deep love and appreciation,
“he became
the perfect reflection of his Father.
“We too know very well
the purpose of the loving training
“we have received here at Gilead
“—to answer the tired one,
not out of our own thoughts,
“but with the words
taught to us through God’s Word.
“Many in the brotherhood
are like a smoldering wick
“and at times feel crushed in spirit.
“Jesus loved and cared for such ones.
“We are determined
to reflect the love Jesus developed
“through his schooling and bring true comfort
“and refreshment to our brothers.
“Words fail to express the depth of our gratitude
“for all that has been done for us.
“The Bethel family
welcomed us into their home
“and showed hospitality
to a degree that we never imagined.
“Our dear instructors became like fathers,
“teaching us with grace and dignity.
“They showed us how to honor
one another through their example.
“They took the time
to comfort us in the face of trials.
“The winsome words
we received through the curriculum
“were as soothing oil on our souls,
“healing and strengthening us
for the days ahead.
“For this,
we wish to deeply thank our instructors
“as well as you dear brothers
on the Governing Body.
“It is now clearer than ever to us
that Jehovah is using you mightily
“in fulfilling your weighty assignment
of overseeing the preaching work.
“Above all, we must thank
“our Father, Jehovah,
from the bottom of our hearts
“for this precious and unforgettable gift.
“Jehovah truly has given us
“‘more than superabundantly
beyond all the things we ask.’
“At the end of this life-defining experience,
“we know our molding is far from complete.
“Our learning will continue.
“Our gratitude compels us to do our utmost
“to support you in all that we do.
“Our hearts overflow with excitement
to work harder than ever before.
“May Jehovah continue to richly bless
the marvelous provision of Gilead
“to the benefit of the worldwide brotherhood
“and the praise and honor
of our most wonderful God, Jehovah.
Your brothers and sisters,
the 145th Class of Gilead.”
Well, this is my opportunity
to say just a few final words to you.
There have been so many wonderful points
mentioned on our program today.
Remember how
we started with our discussion
about the need
to always bring glory to Jehovah
and not to be concerned
about our own glory.
You remember
we started off by mentioning
that maybe it could be tempting
to accept glory
from others if they praise us.
But then on the other hand,
if we get criticized,
it may also be tempting
for us to try and justify ourselves
and inadvertently bring glory to ourselves.
But there is another way too
that we may have to be careful
about not bringing glory to ourselves.
And we can see this
from the example of the apostle Paul.
Now, I know you didn’t bring your Bibles up.
All you have to do is listen.
It’s one scripture, 1 Corinthians chapter 2
—1 Corinthians 2:1, 2.
It’s a vital lesson
that we learn from the apostle Paul.
Here he’s speaking
about when he went to Corinth.
And as we realize,
Corinth was a seat of learning.
The Greeks loved learning.
And what did he say?
In verses 1 and 2:
“So when I came to you, brothers,
“I did not come with extravagant speech
or wisdom declaring
the sacred secret of God to you.”
So Paul didn’t use
“extravagant speech” to impress people.
He says in verse 2: “For I decided.”
Yes, he made a decision.
What was it?
“I decided not to know anything
among you except Jesus Christ.”
And then if we look at verse 5,
he says: “So that your faith [may] be,
not in men’s wisdom, but in God’s power.”
What a wonderful example Paul set
with regard to not drawing attention
to his own wisdom and ability,
even though some
in Corinth because of this
felt he wasn’t a very good speaker.
When we look at how
Paul defended the good news
before audiences large and small,
he certainly was a very, very good orator.
He had that ability, but he decided
to tone it down
because he knew
the brothers there had a weakness.
Now, what weaknesses
were prevalent at that time?
Well, among the Jewish people
—and there were some Jewish people
there in Corinth as well—
they loved to quote great rabbis
and scholars.
And, of course, the Greeks loved
to quote the philosophers.
So, what lesson
do you think we learn from this?
Well, now as you go to your assignments,
perhaps you might be tempted to say:
“Oh! The instructor
or a Governing Body member said this.”
But why should we follow
the example of the apostle Paul?
Well, you see,
if we have something worthwhile
to convey to the brothers and sisters,
find it in God’s Word
as you’ve been searching.
Look in the library—Watchtower Library.
Find something there, but don’t rely
upon the “rabbis,”
the “gurus,”
to show that you have
some inside knowledge
that cannot be verified
by other mere mortals.
Rather, rely upon God’s Word.
Yes, rely on his Word and the publications
that we have through his organization,
and in that way, you can be sure
you will bring glory to Jehovah
and not to yourselves.